docs/api_blocks.rst, before:

.. currentmodule:: redzed

.. role:: strike
  :class: strike

**--- INFORMATION FOR DEVELOPERS ---**

=========
Block API
=========

.. class:: Block(name, *, comment: str="", initial=redzed.UNDEF, stop_timeout=redzed.UNDEF, output_counter=False, output_previous=False, **x_kwargs)

  Base class of all logic blocks. A :class:`Block` has no function by itself
  and cannot be instantiated.

  .. attention::
    :class: note

    If you are not creating a new type of logic blocks,
    you can ignore all :meth:`!rz_methods` and :attr:`!rz_attributes`.
    Symbols starting with a ``rz_`` prefix are reserved
    for interactions with the circuit runner.

  Sections:
    - :ref:`1. Name and comment`
    - :ref:`2. Output`
    - :ref:`3. Circuit membership`
    - :ref:`4. Setup and start`
    - :ref:`5. Persistent state`
    - :ref:`6. Shutdown and cleanup`
    - :ref:`7. Event handling`
    - :ref:`8. Logging functions`
    - :ref:`9. Application data`


1. Name and comment
===================

For a description visit :ref:`setting the name <Setting the name>`.

**Parameters:**

  **name** (str)
    A name uniquely identifying the block.

  **comment** (str)
    An optional comment, by default an empty string.

**Attributes:**

  .. attribute:: Block.name
    :type: str

    The assigned name. Do not modify.

  .. attribute:: Block.comment
    :type: str

    The assigned comment. Do not modify.


2. Output
=========

.. data:: UNDEF

  A singleton representing an undefined output. All other output values
  are valid, including :const:`None`. It is an error to output :const:`UNDEF`
  after the circuit initialization.

  :const:`UNDEF` sentinel is also used as a default for some optional
  keyword arguments to indicate an unused parameter.

**Parameters:**

  Following output modifiers are mutually exclusive and disabled by default:

  **output_counter** (bool) - append a sequence number
    When enabled, the output is a tuple ``(value, sequence_number)``
    instead of just ``value``. The ``sequence_number`` is an integer
    starting at 0 and incremented with each output operation.
    This guarantees a different output even if the new ``value``
    happens to be exactly the same as the previous one.

    Use the counter if you want to activate a connected trigger for each value
    in a series of same values. Do not use it if such series means
    a constant level that does not require an action.

  **output_previous** (bool) - append the previous value
    When enabled, the output is a tuple ``(current_value, previous_value)``
    instead of just ``current_value``. The very first output after initialization
    is ``(first_value, redzed.UNDEF)``. That's the only allowed occurrence
    of :const:`UNDEF` in the output.

    Use this feature to compute deltas or to detect changes, e.g. :const:`False`
    -> :const:`True` without acting on initial :const:`UNDEF` -> :const:`True`.

.. method:: Block.get() -> Any

  Get the current output value.

.. method:: Block.is_undef() -> bool

  Check if the output is :const:`UNDEF`, i.e. if the block is still not initialized.

.. method:: Block._set_output(output: Any) -> bool

  Set the output value. It is not allowed to output :const:`UNDEF`.

  Return :const:`True` if the output has changed. In this case, dependent formulas are
  recalculated and (subsequently) affected triggers activated. Return :const:`False`
  if the output value is the same as before and therefore no circuit activity took place.

  If you override :meth:`!Block._set_output` in a subclass, please don't forget to return
  a proper value; in most cases: ``return super()._set_output(modified_output)``.


3. Circuit membership
=====================

.. attribute:: Block.circuit
  :type: Circuit

  A link to the circuit the logic block belongs to. Every block is automatically
  registered as a component of the current circuit. This reference provides access to
  circuit's functions.


4. Setup and start
==================

The output of just created blocks is set to :const:`UNDEF` sentinel.
The initialization process must replace :const:`UNDEF` with some other value.
When this happens the initialization process stops as completed.

**Parameters:**

  **initial** - block initializer(s), the default is no initializers
    The parameter *initial* is accepted only if :meth:`rz_init` is implemented.
    Otherwise it must not be used.
    A detailed description can be found :ref:`here <Initializers>`.

Following methods are listed in order they are invoked by the circuit runner.
Every logic block implements only those :meth:`!rz_methods()` that it needs
for its functionality.

.. method:: Block.rz_pre_init() -> None

  Optional. Set up necessary resources that could not be prepared in ``__init__()``.

  If implemented, it is called once before initialization. It is typically used for
  resolving block names with :meth:`Circuit.resolve_name`. Using names allows to reference blocks
  that are defined later in the code. Do not set the internal state or the output here.

.. method:: Block.rz_init(init_value: Any, /) -> None

  Optional. Initialize the block's state and output based on the *init_value*.

  If implemented, the block initializers (specified by the *initial* argument)
  call this method in order they were given as long as the output equals :const:`UNDEF`.

  .. warning::

    When implementing :meth:`!rz_init`, do not call :meth:`event` to do the
    initialization. When an uninitialized block receives an event, it
    tries to initialize itself before handling it. However, you may call
    an event handler :meth:`!self._event_ETYPE()` directly.

.. method:: Block.rz_init_default() -> None

  Optional. Initialize the block's state with a built-in default value.

  This is an initializer of last resort. It is called if the block is still
  not initialized after trying all initializers. The base class provides
  a default implementation. If you override it, do not call :meth:`!super().rz_init_default()`.

  The default implementation checks if the block has got :meth:`rz_restore_state`
  or :meth:`rz_init`. If it doesn't, it is assumed that this block type doesn't
  care about its output and the output is set to :const:`None` in order to
  prevent an error.

.. method:: Block.rz_start() -> None

  Optional. Start own activity.

  This method is called once after a successful initialization of all blocks.

  Block's own activity is any activity other than reacting to received events.
  A typical example are timer based actions. Regarding this own activity,
  unless it's needed for the initialization, blocks should remain idle
  until receiving this start call.


5. Persistent state
===================

.. tip::

  Regardless of the persistent state feature, you might want to implement
  :meth:`rz_export_state` just for block inspection purposes.

Block's :ref:`state persistence <Persistent state>` support requires two methods:

.. method:: Block.rz_export_state() -> Any

  Optional. Return the entire internal state.
  The result of the call is undefined when the block hasn't been
  initialized.

  When implementing this method, take into consideration how the
  returned state will be serialized for :ref:`storage <3. Persistent storage>`.
  If not sure, prefer JSON serializable data structures.

  This method is considered low-level and the state should be queried with
  the ":ref:`_get_state`" monitoring event, because the event handler makes
  necessary checks before calling the :meth:`!rz_export_state`.

.. method:: Block.rz_restore_state(state: Any, /) -> None

  Optional. Initialize by restoring the entire internal *state* and the
  corresponding output. The *state* was returned by :meth:`rz_export_state`
  in some previous program run. Keep in mind that the *state*
  could have been exported by an older program version.

**Attributes:**

  .. attribute:: Block.RZ_PERSISTENCE
    :type: bool

    Class attribute. It is :const:`True` if the persistent state
    is supported by this block type.

  .. attribute:: Block.rz_persistence
    :type: enum.Flag

    State persistence settings for a particular block. It is non-zero
    if and only if the state persistence is switched on, i.e.:

    - the circuit has a persistent storage,
    - persistent state is supported by the block type, see :attr:`RZ_PERSISTENCE`
    - the feature was enabled by using :class:`RestoreState` among initializers.

    The value is a combination of following
    `flags [↗] <https://docs.python.org/3/library/enum.html#enum.Flag>`_ OR-ed together:

    .. attribute:: redzed.PersistenceFlags.ENABLED
      :noindex:

      Persistent state is enabled. If not set, all other bits are zero too.

    .. attribute:: redzed.PersistenceFlags.EVENT
      :noindex:

      Option: checkpoints after each event are enabled.

    .. attribute:: redzed.PersistenceFlags.INTERVAL
      :noindex:

      Option: periodic checkpointing is enabled.

  .. attribute:: Block.rz_key
    :type: str

    The persistent storage key associated with this block. It contains the
    block's name. A renamed block won't find its state saved by the old name.


6. Shutdown and cleanup
=======================

**Parameters:**

  **stop_timeout** (float|str) - timeout for asynchronous cleanup
    Optional, default is 10.0 seconds if applicable.
    The timeout can be given as a number of seconds
    or as a :ref:`string with time units <Time durations with units>`.
    It is accepted only if :meth:`rz_astop` is implemented.
    Otherwise it must not be used.

    Note that there is no :strike:`init_timeout` counterpart parameter.
    Async initialization is handled in block's
    :ref:`async initializers <Async initializers>`, not in the block itself.

Exceptions in cleanup functions will be logged, but otherwise ignored.
Please note that when shutting down due to a circuit initialization error,
these "stop" functions may be called even if :meth:`rz_start` hasn't been called.

.. method:: Block.rz_stop() -> None

  Optional. Stop activity and clean up.

.. method:: Block.rz_astop() -> None
  :async:

  Similar to :meth:`rz_stop`, but async.
  It is awaited after the :meth:`!rz_stop`.

  Usually only output blocks need an async shutdown/cleanup.
  The existence of this method automatically enables the *stop_timeout*
  keyword argument. If :meth:`!rz_astop` does not terminate before
  the *stop_timeout* elapses, it will be cancelled.

.. method:: Block.rz_close() -> None

  Optional. This method is called when all blocks are stopped.
  This is the final cleanup function for blocks that must stay
  active also during the shutdown phase, e.g. the output buffers.


7. Event handling
=================

.. type:: EventData

  Event data type. An alias for ``dict[str, Any]``.

  The event data is passed as a Python dict, i.e. it consist of ``'name': <value>`` pairs.
  The keys (names) are strings and valid Python identifiers, because the data
  items were passed to the :meth:`Block.event()` function as keyword arguments.

  When an event requires a value, the preferred name for it is ``'evalue'``.

7A. Entry point:

.. method:: Block.event(etype: str, /, evalue: Any = redzed.UNDEF, **edata: Any) -> Any

    Handle the incoming event of type *etype* with optionally attached *edata*
    by dispatching it to the appropriate handler. Return the handler's exit value.
    :exc:`UnknownEvent` is raised if there is no handler for the *etype*.
    :exc:`CircuitShutDown` is raised if a non-monitoring event arrives after
    circuit's shutdown.

    The *evalue* is part of the *edata*. If it is given (i.e. not :const:`UNDEF`), it is inserted
    into *edata* as ``edata['evalue']``. It is accepted either as a positional or
    as a keyword argument just for convenience.

    .. important::
      Do not overload this method. Implement all functionality inside event handlers.

    .. important::

      While a block is handling an event, it will raise an exception when it receives
      an event of exactly the same type. This precaution stops otherwise infinite loops.

.. exception:: UnknownEvent

  This exception is raised when :meth:`Block.event` is called
  with an event type that the block does not recognize.

.. exception:: CircuitShutDown

  This exception is subclassed from :exc:`!RuntimeError`. It is raised when
  :meth:`Block.event` is called when the circuit is shutting down or closed.
  :ref:`Monitoring events` are excluded from the check and are always accepted.


7B. Event handlers:

.. method:: Block._event_ETYPE(edata: redzed.EventData) -> Any

  Optional. Specialized event handler for type ``ETYPE``.

  ``ETYPE``  stands for an event type name. Each event type needs its own method.
  If a method with matching event type name is defined, it will be called to handle
  that event type. E.g. :meth:`!_event_store` will be called for all ``'store'`` events.

.. method:: Block._default_event_handler(etype: str, edata: redzed.EventData) -> Any

  The handler that is called for event types without a specialized event handler.

  Handle all event types *etype* you want to support in this method and
  call ``super()._default_event_handler(etype, edata)`` for everything else.

All event handlers are supposed to extract their arguments from the *edata*.
Any extra items present there must be ignored.

When developing an event handler, take into consideration how the returned data
will be processed or transmitted. If not sure, prefer JSON serializable data structures.


8. Logging functions
====================

.. method:: Block.log_msg(msg: str, *args, level: int, **kwargs) -> None

  Log a message.

  The block's object name (``str(block)``, not :strike:`block.name`) is prepended to the *msg*
  and then the arguments are passed to the standard :meth:`logging.log` function with the given *level*.

.. method:: Block.log_debug(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None
.. method:: Block.log_info(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None
.. method:: Block.log_warning(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None
.. method:: Block.log_error(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None

  Log a debug/info/warning/error message respectively.
  These are simple :meth:`Block.log_msg` wrappers.

.. method:: Block.log_debug1(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None
.. method:: Block.log_debug2(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None

  Convenience methods for DEBUG level logging. Log the debug message *msg*
  if the :ref:`debug level <Debug levels>` is at least 1 or 2 respectively,


9. Application data
===================

**Parameters:**

  **x_anyname** (Any) - reserved names for keyword arguments, also in upper case
    All keyword arguments starting with ``'x_'`` or ``'X_'`` are accepted
    and stored as block's attributes. These names are reserved for storing
    arbitrary application data.

**Attributes:**

  .. attribute:: Block.x_anyname
    :type: Any

  .. attribute:: Block.X_ANYNAME
    :type: Any

Commit message:

First beta release 26.2.4
New features:

- Output blocks: introducing stop functions
- Repeat: settings may be modified dynamically

docs/api_blocks.rst, after:

.. currentmodule:: redzed

.. role:: strike
  :class: strike

**--- INFORMATION FOR DEVELOPERS ---**

=========
Block API
=========

.. class:: Block(name, *, comment: str="", initial=redzed.UNDEF, stop_timeout=redzed.UNDEF, output_counter=False, output_previous=False, **x_kwargs)

  Base class of all logic blocks. A :class:`Block` has no function by itself
  and cannot be instantiated.

  .. attention::
    :class: note

    If you are not creating a new type of logic blocks,
    you can ignore all :meth:`!rz_methods` and :attr:`!rz_attributes`.
    Symbols starting with a ``rz_`` prefix are reserved
    for interactions with the circuit runner.

  Sections:
    - :ref:`1. Name and comment`
    - :ref:`2. Output`
    - :ref:`3. Circuit membership`
    - :ref:`4. Setup and start`
    - :ref:`5. Persistent state`
    - :ref:`6. Shutdown and cleanup`
    - :ref:`7. Event handling`
    - :ref:`8. Logging functions`
    - :ref:`9. Application data`


1. Name and comment
===================

For a description visit :ref:`setting the name <Setting the name>`.

**Parameters:**

  **name** (str)
    A name uniquely identifying the block.

  **comment** (str)
    An optional comment, by default an empty string.

**Attributes:**

  .. attribute:: Block.name
    :type: str

    The assigned name. Do not modify.

  .. attribute:: Block.comment
    :type: str

    The assigned comment. Do not modify.


2. Output
=========

.. data:: UNDEF

  A singleton representing an undefined output. All other output values
  are valid, including :const:`None`. It is an error to output :const:`UNDEF`
  after the circuit initialization.

  :const:`UNDEF` sentinel is also used as a default for some optional
  keyword arguments to indicate an unused parameter.

**Parameters:**

  Following output modifiers are mutually exclusive and disabled by default:

  **output_counter** (bool) - append a sequence number
    When enabled, the output is a tuple ``(value, sequence_number)``
    instead of just ``value``. The ``sequence_number`` is an integer
    starting at 0 and incremented with each output operation.
    This guarantees a different output even if the new ``value``
    happens to be exactly the same as the previous one.

    Use the counter if you want to activate a connected trigger for each value
    in a series of same values. Do not use it if such series means
    a constant level that does not require an action.

  **output_previous** (bool) - append the previous value
    When enabled, the output is a tuple ``(current_value, previous_value)``
    instead of just ``current_value``. The very first output after initialization
    is ``(first_value, redzed.UNDEF)``. That's the only allowed occurrence
    of :const:`UNDEF` in the output.

    Use this feature to compute deltas or to detect changes, e.g. :const:`False`
    -> :const:`True` without acting on initial :const:`UNDEF` -> :const:`True`.

.. method:: Block.get() -> Any

  Get the current output value.

.. method:: Block.is_undef() -> bool

  Check if the output is :const:`UNDEF`, i.e. if the block is still not initialized.

.. method:: Block._set_output(output: Any) -> bool

  Set the output value. It is not allowed to output :const:`UNDEF`.

  Return :const:`True` if the output has changed. In this case, dependent formulas are
  recalculated and (subsequently) affected triggers activated. Return :const:`False`
  if the output value is the same as before and therefore no circuit activity took place.

  If you override :meth:`!Block._set_output` in a subclass, please don't forget to return
  a proper value; in most cases: ``return super()._set_output(modified_output)``.


3. Circuit membership
=====================

.. attribute:: Block.circuit
  :type: Circuit

  A link to the circuit the logic block belongs to. Every block is automatically
  registered as a component of the current circuit. This reference provides access to
  circuit's functions.


4. Setup and start
==================

The output of just created blocks is set to :const:`UNDEF` sentinel.
The initialization process must replace :const:`UNDEF` with some other value.
When this happens the initialization process stops as completed.

**Parameters:**

  **initial** - block initializer(s), the default is no initializers
    The parameter *initial* is accepted only if :meth:`rz_init` is implemented.
    Otherwise it must not be used.
    A detailed description can be found :ref:`here <Initializers>`.

Following methods are listed in order they are invoked by the circuit runner.
Every logic block implements only those :meth:`!rz_methods()` that it needs
for its functionality.

.. method:: Block.rz_pre_init() -> None

  Optional. Set up necessary resources that could not be prepared in ``__init__()``.

  If implemented, it is called once before initialization. It is typically used for
  resolving block names with :meth:`Circuit.resolve_name`. Using names allows to reference blocks
  that are defined later in the code. Do not set the internal state or the output here.

.. method:: Block.rz_init(init_value: Any, /) -> None

  Optional. Initialize the block's state and output based on the *init_value*.

  If implemented, the block initializers (specified by the *initial* argument)
  call this method in order they were given as long as the output equals :const:`UNDEF`.

  .. warning::

    When implementing :meth:`!rz_init`, do not call :meth:`event` to do the
    initialization. When an uninitialized block receives an event, it
    tries to initialize itself before handling it. However, you may call
    an event handler :meth:`!self._event_ETYPE()` directly.

.. method:: Block.rz_init_default() -> None

  Optional. Initialize the block's state with a built-in default value.

  This is an initializer of last resort. It is called if the block is still
  not initialized after trying all initializers. The base class provides
  a default implementation. If you override it, do not call :meth:`!super().rz_init_default()`.

  The default implementation checks if the block has got :meth:`rz_restore_state`
  or :meth:`rz_init`. If it doesn't, it is assumed that this block type doesn't
  care about its output and the output is set to :const:`None` in order to
  prevent an error.

.. method:: Block.rz_start() -> None

  Optional. Start own activity.

  This method is called once after a successful initialization of all blocks.

  Block's own activity is any activity other than reacting to received events.
  A typical example are timer based actions. Regarding this own activity,
  unless it's needed for the initialization, blocks should remain idle
  until receiving this start call.


5. Persistent state
===================

.. tip::

  Regardless of the persistent state feature, you might want to implement
  :meth:`rz_export_state` just for block inspection purposes.

Block's :ref:`state persistence <Persistent state>` support requires two methods:

.. method:: Block.rz_export_state() -> Any

  Optional. Return the entire internal state.
  The result of the call is undefined when the block hasn't been
  initialized.

  When implementing this method, take into consideration how the
  returned state will be serialized for :ref:`storage <3. Persistent storage>`.
  If not sure, prefer JSON serializable data structures.

  This method is considered low-level and the state should be queried with
  the ":ref:`_get_state`" monitoring event, because the event handler makes
  necessary checks before calling the :meth:`!rz_export_state`.

.. method:: Block.rz_restore_state(state: Any, /) -> None

  Optional. Initialize by restoring the entire internal *state* and the
  corresponding output. The *state* was returned by :meth:`rz_export_state`
  in some previous program run. Keep in mind that the *state*
  could have been exported by an older program version.

**Attributes:**

  .. attribute:: Block.RZ_PERSISTENCE
    :type: bool

    Class attribute. It is :const:`True` if the persistent state
    is supported by this block type.

  .. attribute:: Block.rz_persistence
    :type: enum.Flag

    State persistence settings for a particular block. It is non-zero
    if and only if the state persistence is switched on, i.e.:

    - the circuit has a persistent storage,
    - persistent state is supported by the block type, see :attr:`RZ_PERSISTENCE`
    - the feature was enabled by using :class:`RestoreState` among initializers.

    The value is a combination of following
    `flags [↗] <https://docs.python.org/3/library/enum.html#enum.Flag>`_ OR-ed together:

    .. attribute:: redzed.PersistenceFlags.ENABLED
      :noindex:

      Persistent state is enabled. If not set, all other bits are zero too.

    .. attribute:: redzed.PersistenceFlags.EVENT
      :noindex:

      Option: checkpoints after each event are enabled.

    .. attribute:: redzed.PersistenceFlags.INTERVAL
      :noindex:

      Option: periodic checkpointing is enabled.

  .. attribute:: Block.rz_key
    :type: str

    The persistent storage key associated with this block. It contains the
    block's name. A renamed block won't find its state saved by the old name.


6. Shutdown and cleanup
=======================

**Parameters:**

  **stop_timeout** (float|str) - timeout for asynchronous cleanup
    Optional, default is 10.0 seconds if applicable.
    The timeout can be given as a number of seconds
    or as a :ref:`string with time units <Time durations with units>`.
    It is accepted only if :meth:`rz_astop` is implemented.
    Otherwise it must not be used.

    Note that there is no :strike:`init_timeout` counterpart parameter.
    Async initialization is handled in block's
    :ref:`async initializers <Async initializers>`, not in the block itself.

Exceptions in cleanup functions will be logged, but otherwise ignored.
Please note that when shutting down due to a circuit initialization error,
these "stop" functions may be called even if :meth:`rz_start` hasn't been called.

.. method:: Block.rz_stop() -> None

  Optional. Stop activity and clean up.

.. method:: Block.rz_astop() -> None
  :async:

  Similar to :meth:`rz_stop`, but async.
  It is awaited after the :meth:`!rz_stop`.

  Usually only output blocks need an async shutdown/cleanup.
  The existence of this method automatically enables the *stop_timeout*
  keyword argument. If :meth:`!rz_astop` does not terminate before
  the *stop_timeout* elapses, it will be cancelled.

.. method:: Block.rz_close() -> None

  Optional. This method is called when all blocks are stopped.
  This is the final cleanup function for blocks that must stay
  active also during the shutdown phase, e.g. the output buffers.

.. method:: Block.rz_is_shut_down() -> bool

  Blocks reject all non-monitoring events after shutdown.
  This method is called to check if this is the case.

  The default implementation follows the circuit's state.
  i.e. when the circuit shuts down, the block shuts down as well.
  This default is appropriate for most blocks except output
  blocks which shut down after :ref:`stop functions <Stop functions>`.


7. Event handling
=================

.. type:: EventData

  Event data type. An alias for ``dict[str, Any]``.

  The event data is passed as a Python dict, i.e. it consist of ``'name': <value>`` pairs.
  The keys (names) are strings and valid Python identifiers, because the data
  items were passed to the :meth:`Block.event()` function as keyword arguments.

  When an event requires a value, the preferred name for it is ``'evalue'``.

7A. Entry point:

.. method:: Block.event(etype: str, /, evalue: Any = redzed.UNDEF, **edata: Any) -> Any

    Handle the incoming event of type *etype* with optionally attached *edata*
    by dispatching it to the appropriate handler. Return the handler's exit value.
    :exc:`UnknownEvent` is raised if there is no handler for the *etype*.
    :exc:`CircuitShutDown` is raised if a non-monitoring event arrives after
    block's shutdown - see :ref:`rz_is_shut_down`.

    The *evalue* is part of the *edata*. If it is given (i.e. not :const:`UNDEF`), it is inserted
    into *edata* as ``edata['evalue']``. It is accepted either as a positional or
    as a keyword argument just for convenience.

    .. important::
      Do not overload this method. Implement all functionality inside event handlers.

    .. important::

      While a block is handling an event, it will raise an exception when it receives
      an event of exactly the same type. This precaution stops otherwise infinite loops.

.. exception:: UnknownEvent

  This exception is raised when :meth:`Block.event` is called
  with an event type that the block does not recognize.

.. exception:: CircuitShutDown

  This exception is subclassed from :exc:`!RuntimeError`. It is raised when
  :meth:`Block.event` is called during shut down. The exact moment when a block
  starts to reject events depends on :meth:`Block.rz_is_shut_down`.
  :ref:`Monitoring events` are excluded from the check and are always accepted.


7B. Event handlers:

.. method:: Block._event_ETYPE(edata: redzed.EventData) -> Any

  Optional. Specialized event handler for type ``ETYPE``.

  ``ETYPE``  stands for an event type name. Each event type needs its own method.
  If a method with matching event type name is defined, it will be called to handle
  that event type. E.g. :meth:`!_event_store` will be called for all ``'store'`` events.

.. method:: Block._default_event_handler(etype: str, edata: redzed.EventData) -> Any

  The handler that is called for event types without a specialized event handler.

  Handle all event types *etype* you want to support in this method and
  call ``super()._default_event_handler(etype, edata)`` for everything else.

All event handlers are supposed to extract their arguments from the *edata*.
Any extra items present there must be ignored.

When developing an event handler, take into consideration how the returned data
will be processed or transmitted. If not sure, prefer JSON serializable data structures.


8. Logging functions
====================

.. method:: Block.log_msg(msg: str, *args, level: int, **kwargs) -> None

  Log a message.

  The block's object name (``str(block)``, not :strike:`block.name`) is prepended to the *msg*
  and then the arguments are passed to the standard :meth:`logging.log` function with the given *level*.

.. method:: Block.log_debug(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None
.. method:: Block.log_info(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None
.. method:: Block.log_warning(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None
.. method:: Block.log_error(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None

  Log a debug/info/warning/error message respectively.
  These are simple :meth:`Block.log_msg` wrappers.

.. method:: Block.log_debug1(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None
.. method:: Block.log_debug2(msg: str, *args, **kwargs) -> None

  Convenience methods for DEBUG level logging. Log the debug message *msg*
  if the :ref:`debug level <Debug levels>` is at least 1 or 2 respectively,


9. Application data
===================

**Parameters:**

  **x_anyname** (Any) - reserved names for keyword arguments, also in upper case
    All keyword arguments starting with ``'x_'`` or ``'X_'`` are accepted
    and stored as block's attributes. These names are reserved for storing
    arbitrary application data.

**Attributes:**

  .. attribute:: Block.x_anyname
    :type: Any

  .. attribute:: Block.X_ANYNAME
    :type: Any
