docs/api_cron.rst, before:

.. currentmodule:: redzed

**--- INFORMATION FOR DEVELOPERS ---**

================
Cron service API
================

This internal service allows execution of scheduled actions. It is named after
the traditional Unix daemon.

A client block instructs the cron at what times within a day it wants to
get activated. The client may update its schedule at any time.
The cron activates the client blocks in given times.


Cron clients
============

In order to use the cron service, a logical block must make
few preparations before it can send its schedule to the cron:

- Implement a callback that the cron will call at given times:

  .. method:: Block.rz_cron_event(now: datetime.time)

    A method called by cron with one argument, the current time.
    Only blocks with this method are able to use cron.

- Get and save a reference to the cron object before using it
  for the first time. Choose either the UTC time or the local time::

    name = '_cron_utc' if utc else '_cron_local'
    cron = redzed.get_circuit().resolve_name(name)

A schedule is a :abbr:`collection (a list, tuple or set)` of times of day
when an activation from the cron is requested. The times are represented by Python's
`datetime.time [↗] <https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#time-objects>`_
objects.

.. important::

  Do not include any timezone information in the :class:`datetime.time` objects.
  The cron accepts only a so-called "naive" time objects.

Finally, use the saved reference to post the schedule to the cron::

  cron.set_schedule(self, schedule)

The called method is:

.. method:: Cron.set_schedule(self, blk: Block, times_of_day: Collection[datetime.time]) -> None:

  Replace any existing schedule for block *blk* with the new schedule *times_of_day*.
  Block's :meth:`!blk.rz_cron_event` will be called at given times regardless of date.

  Note that the :class:`Cron` class is not a public symbol.


Cron server
===========

This server has a form of a common :class:`Block` and is created automatically
on demand. There can exist two instances, one for the local time
and one for the :abbr:`UTC (Coordinated Universal Time)` time.
Their names are ``'_cron_local'`` and ``'_cron_utc'`` respectively.


Inspecting schedule
-------------------

The cron blocks support the ':ref:`_get_config`' monitoring event which returns
the scheduling data for the whole circuit.


DST adjustments
---------------

The :abbr:`DST (Daylight Saving Time a.k.a. Summer time)` affects the local time
in many time zones, but not the UTC time. If you do not want any irregularities,
consider switching to the UTC zone.

The cron service detects the changes in the clock time, but it does not
modify its behavior:

- When DST starts, the clock is moved forward
  and actions that would have been made in that time are skipped.

- When DST ends, the clock is rolled back and actions scheduled for that time
  are executed twice. To mitigate, client blocks may check the
  `datetime.time.fold [↗] <https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#datetime.time.fold>`_
  attribute of the *now* argument.

Commit message:

Second alpha release 26.1.28
Breaking changes:
- @formula: the decorator now does not take parameters
- FSM: timed and non-timed states were combined into single table
- DataPoll: support for a validator was removed.
- Memory, MemoryExp: store events now report validation errors differently
- OutputWorker, OutputController, InitTask: argument coro_func
  was renamed to aw_func

Bug fixes:
- QueueBuffer: the buffer was sometimes shut down before
  the stop_value was retrieved
- Memory (but not MemoryExp): during initialization from saved persistent
  data, previously preprocessed data were erroneously preprocessed again
- cron server: a race condition during schedule updates was fixed
- some async function/coroutine/awaitable type checks were removed
  due to false positives

New features, improvements:
- Block initializers: the rule for distinguishing multiple
  initializers from ordinary sequences was relaxed
- QueueBuffer, MemoryBuffer: buffers support data validation
- logging setup was improved
- output counter now does not wrap around

docs/api_cron.rst, after:

.. currentmodule:: redzed

**--- INFORMATION FOR DEVELOPERS ---**

================
Cron service API
================

This internal service allows execution of scheduled actions. It is named after
the traditional Unix daemon.

A client block instructs the cron at what times within a day it wants to
get activated. The client may update its schedule at any time.
The cron activates the client blocks in given times.


Cron clients
============

In order to use the cron service, a logical block must make
few preparations before it can send its schedule to the cron:

- Implement a callback that the cron will call at given times:

  .. method:: Block.rz_cron_event(now: datetime.time)

    A method called by cron with one argument, the current time.
    Only blocks with this method are able to use cron.

    :meth:`!Block.rz_cron_event` will be called according to a schedule,
    but may be called also at other times, most notably when
    the computer clock makes a jump like when the DST begins or ends.

- Get and save a reference to the cron object before using it
  for the first time. Choose either the UTC time or the local time::

    name = '_cron_utc' if utc else '_cron_local'
    cron = redzed.get_circuit().resolve_name(name)

A schedule is a :abbr:`collection (a list, tuple or set)` of times of day
when an activation from the cron is requested. The times are represented by Python's
`datetime.time [↗] <https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#time-objects>`_
objects.

.. important::

  Do not include any timezone information in the :class:`datetime.time` objects.
  The cron accepts only a so-called "naive" time objects. The timezone
  is always implied from cron's configuration.

Finally, use the saved reference to post the schedule to the cron::

  cron.set_schedule(self, schedule)

The called method is:

.. method:: Cron.set_schedule(self, blk: Block, times_of_day: Collection[datetime.time]) -> None:

  Replace any existing schedule for block *blk* with the new schedule *times_of_day*.
  Block's :meth:`Block.blk.rz_cron_event` will be called at given times regardless of date.

  Note that the :class:`Cron` class is not a public symbol.


Cron server
===========

This server has a form of a common :class:`Block` and is created automatically
on demand. There can exist two instances, one for the local time
and one for the :abbr:`UTC (Coordinated Universal Time)` time.
Their names are ``'_cron_local'`` and ``'_cron_utc'`` respectively.


Inspecting schedule
-------------------

The cron server block supports the ':ref:`_get_config`' monitoring event.
It returns the scheduling data for the whole circuit.


DST adjustments
---------------

The :abbr:`DST (Daylight Saving Time a.k.a. Summer time)` affects the local time
in many time zones, but not the UTC time. If you do not want any irregularities,
consider switching to the UTC zone.

- When the DST starts, the clock is moved forward
  and scheduled actions that would have been made in that time are skipped.

- When the DST ends, the clock is rolled back and actions scheduled for that time
  are executed twice. To mitigate, client blocks may check the
  `datetime.time.fold [↗] <https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#datetime.time.fold>`_
  attribute of the *now* argument.

- As with every detected clock time jump, *all* cron client blocks get
  an unscheduled :meth:`Block.rz_cron_event` call.
